docs:#887 add "Configuring Topics" (#1410)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/develop/config-topics.mdx

 | `retention_bytes`            | null (no limit)           | `retention.bytes`         |
 | `delete_retention_ms`        | 604800000 ms (1 week)     | `retention.ms`            |
 | `log_segment_ms`             | null (no limit)           | `segment.ms`              |
 | `log_segment_size`           | 134217728 bytes (128 MiB) | `segment.bytes`           |
 | `log_compression_type`       | producer                  | `compression.type`        |
 | `log_message_timestamp_type` | CreateTime                | `message.timestamp.type`  |
 | `kafka_batch_max_bytes`      | 1048576 bytes (1 MiB)     | `max.message.bytes`       |

These default settings are best suited to a one-node cluster in a development environment. To modify the default values in the configuration file, see [Configure Cluster Properties](../../manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-property-configuration) for instructions. Even if you set default values that work for most topics, you may still want to change some properties for a specific topic.

## Creating a topic

Creating a topic can be as simple as specifying a name for your topic on the command line. For example, to create a topic named `xyz`:

> `rpk topic create xyz`

Reviewer: What do you think about making this a code block instead? adding the ```.

This command creates a topic named `xyz` with one partition and one replica, since these are the default values set in the cluster configuration file.

But suppose you want to create a topic with different values for these settings. The guidelines in this section show you how to choose the number of partitions and replicas for your use case.

### Choosing the number of partitions

A partition acts as a log file where topic data is written. Dividing topics into partitions allows producers to write messages in parallel, and consumers to read messages in parallel. The higher the number of partitions, the greater the throughput.

:::tip
As a general rule, select a number of partitions that corresponds to the maximum number of consumers in a consumer group that will consume the data.
:::

For example, suppose you plan to create a consumer group with 10 consumers. To create a topic “xyz” with 10 partitions:

> `rpk topic create xyz -p 10`

Reviewer: Same comment about the code block, and the same for the rest of the commands that are not inline.

Author: Done.

:::

## Updating topic configurations

After you create a topic, you can update the topic property settings for all new data written to that topic. For example, you can add partitions, change the replication factor, or change a configuration setting like the cleanup policy.

### Adding partitions

You can add partitions to a topic after you create it. For example, suppose you added nodes to your cluster, and you want to take advantage of the additional processing power. To increase the number of partitions for existing topics, run:

`rpk topic add-partitions [TOPICS...] --num [#]`

Note that `--num <#>` is the number of partitions to _add_, not the total number of partitions.

### Changing the replication factor

Suppose you configure a topic with the default replication factor of 1 (which is specified in the cluster properties configuration file). Now you want to change the replication factor to 3, so you can have two backups of topic data in case a broker goes down. To set the replication factor to 3 for all new data written to a topic, run:

`rpk topic alter-config [TOPICS...] --set replication.factor=3`

:::note

> The replication factor should not exceed the number of Redpanda brokers.

Reviewer 2: not only should not, but cannot -- if RF > # brokers, the request is rejected

:::

### Changing the cleanup policy

The cleanup policy determines how to clean up the partition log files when they reach a certain size - by deleting data based on age or log size, by compacting the data and only keeping the latest values for each key, or by using a combination of deletion and compaction.

Suppose you configure a topic using the default cleanup policy `delete`, and you want to change the policy to `compact`. Run the `rpk topic alter-config` command as shown:

> `rpk topic alter-config [TOPICS…] —-set cleanup.policy=compact`

Reviewer 2: It might be worth changing one of these examples or adding a new example: _removing_ a previously changed configuration.

e.g.
* Default configuration of the cluster is cleanup.policy=delete
* We have previously set cleanup.policy=compact
* Now we want to actually want to revert back to the default cluster policy, we `rpk topic alter-config [TOPICS...] --delete cleanup.policy`

Author: @twmb 
I added your suggested example. Please review again!

```
rpk topic describe test_topic
SUMMARY
=======
NAME        test_topic
PARTITIONS  1
REPLICAS    1

CONFIGS
=======
KEY                           VALUE                          SOURCE
cleanup.policy                delete                         DYNAMIC_TOPIC_CONFIG
compression.type              producer                       DEFAULT_CONFIG
max.message.bytes             1048576                        DEFAULT_CONFIG
message.timestamp.type        CreateTime                     DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.datapolicy           function_name:  script_name:   DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.remote.delete        true                           DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.remote.read          false                          DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.remote.write         false                          DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.bytes               -1                             DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.local.target.bytes  -1                             DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.local.target.ms     86400000                       DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.ms                  604800000                      DEFAULT_CONFIG

> segment.bytes                 1073741824                     DEFAULT_CONFIG

Reviewer: This seems off vs the UI:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/59714880/227571800-11c2e0a5-e4ba-4d22-ad74-a1b180c3544f.png)

Author: @r-vasquez 
What do you see that is "off" from the UI?

Author: I checked the deploy preview and the columns are aligned. It should be OK.

Reviewer: Interesting, this is just for Chrome.

Firefox:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/59714880/229178454-de5c77e3-f23e-4376-bb29-807152f789a5.png)

Chrome:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/59714880/229178524-a472ad89-cc25-4e68-9437-b99d17f639da.png)

Not something to fix in this PR though :+1: thanks

The following table shows the topic property settings listed in the cluster configuration file along with their default values, and the equivalent topic property names:
 
 | Cluster property             | Default                   | Topic property            |
 | :--------------------------- | :------------------------ | :------------------------ |
 | `log_cleanup_policy`         | delete                    | `cleanup.policy`          |
 | `retention_bytes`            | null (no limit)           | `retention.bytes`         |
 | `delete_retention_ms`        | 604800000 ms (1 week)     | `retention.ms`            |
 | `log_segment_ms`             | null (no limit)           | `segment.ms`              |
 | `log_segment_size`           | 134217728 bytes (128 MiB) | `segment.bytes`           |
 | `log_compression_type`       | producer                  | `compression.type`        |
 | `log_message_timestamp_type` | CreateTime                | `message.timestamp.type`  |
 | `kafka_batch_max_bytes`      | 1048576 bytes (1 MiB)     | `max.message.bytes`       |

> These default settings are best suited to a one-node cluster in a development environment. To modify the default values in the configuration file, see [Configure Cluster Properties](../../manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-property-configuration) for instructions. Even if you set default values that work for most topics, you may still want to change some properties for a specific topic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These default settings are best suited to a one-node cluster in a development environment. To learn how to modify the default values in the configuration file, see [Configure Cluster Properties](../../manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-property-configuration). Even if you set default values that work for most topics, you may still want to change some properties for a specific topic.
```

> These default settings are best suited to a one-node cluster in a development environment. To modify the default values in the configuration file, see [Configure Cluster Properties](../../manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-property-configuration) for instructions. Even if you set default values that work for most topics, you may still want to change some properties for a specific topic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These default settings are best suited to a one-broker cluster in a development environment. To modify the default values in the configuration file, see [Configure Cluster Properties](../../manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-property-configuration) for instructions. Even if you set default values that work for most topics, you may still want to change some properties for a specific topic.
```

Author: Done.

> ## Creating a topic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Create a topic
```

Creating a topic can be as simple as specifying a name for your topic on the command line. For example, to create a topic named `xyz`:

```
rpk topic create xyz
```

This command creates a topic named `xyz` with one partition and one replica, since these are the default values set in the cluster configuration file.

> But suppose you want to create a topic with different values for these settings. The guidelines in this section show you how to choose the number of partitions and replicas for your use case.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following sections show how to create a topic with different values for these settings. 
```

Author: The focus of this section is to provide guidelines for selecting the number of partitions and replicas, rather than telling users how to change the values.

### Choosing the number of partitions

A partition acts as a log file where topic data is written. Dividing topics into partitions allows producers to write messages in parallel, and consumers to read messages in parallel. The higher the number of partitions, the greater the throughput.

:::tip

> As a general rule, select a number of partitions that corresponds to the maximum number of consumers in a consumer group that will consume the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a general rule, select a number of partitions that corresponds to the maximum number of consumers in the consumer group that will read the data.
```

Author: You can have multiple consumer groups reading data from the same topic, so "the" consumer group would be incorrect. I could change "a" to "any":

...select a number of partitions that corresponds to the maximum number of consumers in any consumer group that will read the data.

:::

> For example, suppose you plan to create a consumer group with 10 consumers. To create a topic “xyz” with 10 partitions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, suppose you plan to create a consumer group with 10 consumers. To create a topic `xyz` with 10 partitions:
```

```
rpk topic create xyz -p 10
```

> ### Choosing the replication factor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Choose the replication factor
```

> Replicas are copies of partitions that are distributed across different nodes, so if one node goes down, other nodes still have a copy of the data. The default replication factor in the cluster configuration is set to 1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Replicas are copies of partitions that are distributed across different brokers, so if one broker goes down, other brokers still have a copy of the data. The default replication factor in the cluster configuration is set to 1.
```

Author: Done.

> By choosing a replication factor greater than 1, you ensure that each partition has a copy of its data on at least one other node. One replica acts as the leader, and the other replicas are followers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By choosing a replication factor greater than 1, you ensure that each partition has a copy of its data on at least one other broker. One replica acts as the leader, and the other replicas are followers.
```

Author: Done.

To specify a replication factor of 3 for topic “xyz”:

```
rpk topic create xyz -r 3
```

:::note
The replication factor must be an odd number. Redpanda Data recommends a replication factor of 3 for most use cases.
:::

> ## Updating topic configurations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Update topic configurations
```

> After you create a topic, you can update the topic property settings for all new data written to that topic. For example, you can add partitions, change the replication factor, or change a configuration setting like the cleanup policy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After you create a topic, you can update the topic property settings for all new data written to it. For example, you can add partitions, change the replication factor, or change a configuration setting like the cleanup policy.
```

Author: Done.

> ### Adding partitions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Add partitions
```

> You can add partitions to a topic after you create it. For example, suppose you added nodes to your cluster, and you want to take advantage of the additional processing power. To increase the number of partitions for existing topics, run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can add partitions to a topic. For example, suppose you add brokers to your cluster, and you want to take advantage of the additional processing power. To increase the number of partitions for existing topics, run:
```

Author: Took suggestions about changing "added nodes" to "add brokers". Rewrote like this:
You can assign a certain number of partitions when you create a topic, and add partitions later. For example, suppose you add brokers to your cluster, and you want to take advantage of the additional processing power. To increase the number of partitions for existing topics, run:

```
rpk topic add-partitions [TOPICS...] --num [#]
```

Note that `--num <#>` is the number of partitions to _add_, not the total number of partitions.

> ### Changing the replication factor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Change the replication factor
```

> Suppose you configure a topic with the default replication factor of 1 (which is specified in the cluster properties configuration file). Now you want to change the replication factor to 3, so you can have two backups of topic data in case a broker goes down. To set the replication factor to 3 for all new data written to a topic, run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Suppose you create a topic with the default replication factor of 1 (which is specified in the cluster properties configuration file). Now you want to change the replication factor to 3, so you can have two backups of topic data in case a broker goes down. To set the replication factor to 3 for all new data written to the topic, run:
```

```
rpk topic alter-config [TOPICS...] --set replication.factor=3
```

:::note
The replication factor can't exceed the number of Redpanda brokers. If you try to set a replication factor greater than the number of brokers, the request is rejected.
:::

> ### Changing the cleanup policy

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Change the cleanup policy
```

> The cleanup policy determines how to clean up the partition log files when they reach a certain size - by deleting data based on age or log size, by compacting the data and only keeping the latest values for each key, or by using a combination of deletion and compaction.

Reviewer 3: @AnneLeeperRP do you mean the dash to be a colon or is this supposed to be a list?

Author: I substituted a colon for the dash and used a bullet list for the three choices.

Suppose you configure a topic using the default cleanup policy `delete`, and you want to change the policy to `compact`. Run the `rpk topic alter-config` command as shown:

```
rpk topic alter-config [TOPICS…] —-set cleanup.policy=compact
```

> ### Removing a configuration setting

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Remove a configuration setting
```

You can remove a configuration that overrides the default setting, and the setting will use the default value again. For example, suppose you altered the cleanup policy to use `compact` instead of the default, `delete`. Now you want to return the policy setting to the default. To remove the configuration setting `cleanup.policy=compact`, run `rpk topic alter-config` with the `--delete` flag as shown:

```
rpk topic alter-config [TOPICS...] --delete cleanup.policy
```

> ## Listing topic configuration settings

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## List topic configuration settings
```

> You can display all the configuration settings for a topic by running:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To display all the configuration settings for a topic, run:
```

Author: Done.

```

> rpk topic describe <topic-name> -c

Reviewer 3: @AnneLeeperRP It'd be nice if all the examples on this page were written like this one, so they could be copy/pasted by the user direct (instead of, e.g., `rpk topic alter-config [TOPICS…]`)

Author: Done.

```

> The `-c` flag limits the command output to just the topic configurations. This command is useful for checking the default configuration settings before you make any changes, and for verifying changes after you make them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `-c` flag limits the command output to just the topic configurations. This command is useful for checking the default configuration settings before you make any changes and verifying changes after you make them.
```

Author: Left the comma for readability, and left "for" to maintain the reference point ("useful for...").

> The following command output is displayed after running `rpk topic describe test-topic`, where `test-topic` was created with default settings:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following command output displays after running `rpk topic describe test-topic`, where `test-topic` was created with default settings:
```

Author: Done.

> The following command output is displayed after running `rpk topic describe test-topic`, where `test-topic` was created with default settings:

Reviewer 3: You could put the output in an Expected Output element?

Author: Skipping for now. This can be in a separate doc issue if necessary.

```
rpk topic describe test_topic
SUMMARY
=======
NAME        test_topic
PARTITIONS  1
REPLICAS    1

CONFIGS
=======
KEY                           VALUE                          SOURCE
cleanup.policy                delete                         DYNAMIC_TOPIC_CONFIG
compression.type              producer                       DEFAULT_CONFIG
max.message.bytes             1048576                        DEFAULT_CONFIG
message.timestamp.type        CreateTime                     DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.datapolicy           function_name:  script_name:   DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.remote.delete        true                           DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.remote.read          false                          DEFAULT_CONFIG
redpanda.remote.write         false                          DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.bytes               -1                             DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.local.target.bytes  -1                             DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.local.target.ms     86400000                       DEFAULT_CONFIG
retention.ms                  604800000                      DEFAULT_CONFIG
segment.bytes                 1073741824                     DEFAULT_CONFIG
```

> Now suppose you add two partitions, and increase the number of replicas to 3. The new command output confirms the changes in the `SUMMARY` section:

Reviewer 3: same here. Not necessary but you could list the command then put the output in an Expected Output element that users would need to click

Author: Skipping for now.

```
SUMMARY
=======
NAME        test_topic
PARTITIONS  3
REPLICAS    3
```

> ## Deleting a topic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Delete a topic
```

> After you’re done with a topic, you can delete it by running:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To delete a topic, run:
```

Author: Done.

```
rpk topic delete <topic-name>
```

When a topic is deleted, its underlying data is deleted, too.

To delete multiple topics at a time, provide a space-separated list. For example:

```

> rpk topic delete topic1 topic2

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
rpk topic delete <topic1> <topic2>
```

Author: Introduced the example with this text, so the example clearly shows the spaces between topics:
For example, to delete two topics named `topic1` and `topic2`, run:

```

> You can also use the `-r` flag to specify one or more regular expressions; then, any topic names that match the pattern you specify will be deleted. The following command deletes any topics whose names start with “f” and any whose names end with “r”:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also use the `-r` flag to specify one or more regular expressions; then, any topic names that match the pattern you specify are deleted. For example, to delete topics with names that start with “f” and end with “r”, run:
```

Author: Done.
